# BrainTrain - an EEG - Based Orthosis to Train Contralateral Motor Pathways in Hemiparetic Stroke Patients
In this project, I created a pipeline to decode intended hand movement and control a motorized orthosis for hemiparetic stroke patients. The inspiration for this idea came from my experience shadowing in a physical therapy clinic, where I saw multiple patients with left/right brain stroke who were impaired in various degrees, from an inability to open the left fist from a clenched position, needing to use the right hand to help pry open their thumb, to subdural hemmhorage left untreated, which induced stroke that impaired the regulation of tone in the left leg, immobility in the left hand, and in some cases, speech difficulty caused by residual damage to the left brain. For context, stroke commonly involves a loss of bloodflow to a particular region of the brain, commonly in motor - relevant regions, and requires an immediate removal of blood clots to prevent near - instant death, with later impacts involving a paralysis/lack of regulation of movement in one side of the body. 

While several methods, such as functional electrical stimulation, robotic arms, and EEG - based ipsilateral systems used to bypass injured pathways already exist to help such patients, I was inspired by the use of mirror therapy to mimic the proper functionality of the impaired hand, as well as PT exercises that stroke patients would traditionally struggle with - some examples include running on a treadmill with weight attached to the leg opposite to the side of brain damage(used to force patients to apply increased knee drive to the stroke - affected leg in natural gait), and moving the impaired leg over obstacles to promote a habit of increasing stride length in the impaired side of the body. 

Therefore, when thinking of an idea for my system, I wanted to develop a system that didn't bypass injured brain pathways, but rather, reconstruct them over time through continual usage of the contralateral side of the brain to move the impaired hand. Several current systems utilize motor - relevant signals from the same side of the brain to control the same side arm/leg, but this is unnatural - and involves building alternative neural connections, rather than strengthening impaired pathways. 

I intend to attach a motor to a natural orthosis/glove, which patients use to keep their hands in the right positions to easen movement. A motor would decode intent from this heuristic pipeline, which identifies the hand a patient intends to move by measuring the event - related desynchronization(ERD) observed in the alpha - beta(8-30 hz) frequency range via an EEG headset. Brain rhythms in the alpha - beta frequency, specifically mu rhythms in the alpha range, are commonly linked to motor actions, and drops in the "power" of these frequencies(lowered PSD), or contribution of these frequencies to an overall brain signal, are linked to the intent, planning, and execution of motor action - this is referred to as ERD. Mu/beta ERD drops in the right hemisphere correspond to left hand motor intent/action, while mu/beta drops in the left hemisphere correspond to right hand motor intent/action. However, for patients with severe brain damage, it is hard to produce a high enough contralateral drop, and therefore, ipsilateral/same - side signals must be harnessed to aid in movement. While some methods purely utilize ipsilateral system, my pipeline rewards patients with movement of the orthosis when the percentage of ERD drop from the opposite - side/contralateral hemisphere is greater than the left, which stimulates a positive feedback loop over time. 

The data used to train and evaluate the pipeline's accuracy comes from the WCCI 2020 Glasgow Clinical Brain Computer Interfaces Challenge(CBCI 2020): https://github.com/SulemanRasheed/CBCI-Competition-2020/blob/master/Data/README.md - from which I utilized the dataset structure, and participant training/testing data

These are some additional research publications I used to develop my veto and dual gate logic for triggering movement: 

Cantillo-Negrete, Jessica, et al. “The ReHand-BCI Trial: A Randomized Controlled Trial of a Brain-Computer Interface for Upper Extremity Stroke Neurorehabilitation.” Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 19, Frontiers Media SA, June 2025, https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2025.1579988.

Dodd, Keith C., et al. “Role of the Contralesional vs. Ipsilesional Hemisphere in Stroke Recovery.” Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, vol. 11, Sept. 2017, https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2017.00469.

Zhang, Y.; Gao, Y.; Zhou, J.; Zhang, Z.; Feng, M.; Liu, Y. Advances in Brain-Computer Interface Controlled Functional Electrical Stimulation for Upper Limb Recovery after Stroke. Brain Research Bulletin 2025, 111354. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainresbull.2025.111354.
‌

‌

